The production on the Griffiths was done in London and I was there once because six months after the film was finished I was still writing.
And I went over and Stephen and the other people had spent the morning adding the sound of the elevator to John Cusack's apartment.
whenever the elevator went up and down, he could hear it in his apartment.
They'd spent the morning putting that in and looking at it and listening to it and deciding it didn't work, and now they were going to spend the afternoon taking it out again.
Everybody's getting paid all this time, too, right?
Well, yes, but that's boring.
And so, meanwhile, I'm off, you know, happily making something else up.
So between the...
the wrong temperament and the impatience.
I would never be a good director, so my job is writer.
And for that, you know, okay, I do my best, and then it's up to them.
Bill Goldman has always said that.
He won't go near a film while it's being shot.
Really?
Yeah, Stephen Frears wanted me on the set, and I was on the set, and I enjoyed it.
But Bill Goldman says, I've done my job now.
It's up to them to do this.
And of course, he's been paid very well for this.
And I guess once the check clears, you can do anything you want with it, right?
Yeah, I know.
Twenty-some years ago, he did the screenplay from a book of mine called The Hot Rock.
And he lives in New York.
and they shot the film in new york and the day they started shooting he went to paris really and he didn't come back until they were finished isn't that something maybe the directors like that too but maybe also they want you around if they well it depends you know stephen uh is english and television trained and he likes
The writer being around, he likes that collaborative aspect.
A movie that I did before that was called The Stepfather, and Joe Rubin directed that, and he couldn't wait for me to get out of town.
They shot it in Vancouver, and I came back here, and I think he had spies to let him know if I were to cross the Hudson River.
Yeah.
Well, we got along up to then, wasn't it?
He was just not used to the idea of having another creator around while he was lording it over the set.
What do you enjoy doing most?
What's more satisfying?
Oh, novels, novels.
Sure, sure, because that's, you know, then I'm the whole cheese then, you know, and I am the set decorator and everything else.
And you've probably got more pseudonyms than Evan Hunter, too, right?
I understand.
You've probably written on the... Maybe not.
I don't know.
Well, probably a tie.
He's got four or five that I know of.
But tell me about that.
Is that mainly a commercial imperative?
That was because... It was a sort of brand-name thing, another way General Motors does it.
You know, this is a Cadillac and this is a Chevy.
And also, back...
It's been a long while since I've done pseudonyms because film takes the place.
The time that Richard Stark used to spend writing three novels, now I spend rewriting one screenplay.
You don't write movies, you rewrite them.
So I was quite prolific and I was doing too much stuff for one name and I was doing a variety of things so it seemed
good idea to put different names on them i mean i did an interview with them a couple months ago and uh and he said a lot of it just there were times when when he he could get stories multiple stories in the same issue you know the magazine but so you had to have two different bylines there oh yeah oh yeah i was around the same time at manhunt magazine and a couple of those sure yeah i was there too i mean he says you know i mean you don't want to let a name get in the way of a sale and uh
That's something, huh?
I mean, so you are really a quintessentially professional writer then.
I mean, this is your life.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And how many novels to your credit?
Well, it's somewhere around 40 under my name and probably something over 30 on other names.
So there comes a point where there's really...
Nothing to be gained by counting.
Any favorites?
Well, always the most recent one.
Always.
You know, because it's still, you know, all of the triumphs and defeats and sudden surprises and everything are still fresh in my mind.
You know, saying, oh, my God, I remember when I suddenly figured out how to do that.
But then there are some that stay with you.
Uh...
So the only other one I would mention actually has sort of an odd history.
It was called Kahawa, K-A-H-A-W-A.
It was published in 1982 very badly.
The publishing company was undergoing upheavals at the time.
Just for curiosity, who?
It was Viking.
I don't think... No, I won't mention that.
I don't think there's anybody there now who was there then in 1982.
It was just a mess.
And it was supposed to be a caber, and it was originally called Coffee to Go.
And it was set in Uganda under Idi Amin.
That was another time when I had to go look at the place.
You know, it was far from New York.
You went there while Idi Amin was in trouble?
No, no, no.
It was...
He was gone and never and never.
He was out at that point, wasn't he?
Yeah, January 77.
He was run out.
And I went to Kenya.
Because part of the story was in Kenya and part of it was Uganda.
And Uganda was still in utter turmoil at that time.
And very few people who went into Uganda came back out again.
And they were eating people there.
And I'm protein.
Jesus Christ.
No joke.
So I went to Lake Victoria and looked across at Uganda.
Well, I've been here.
I know what it looks like, right?
Yeah.
And I talked to a lot of people in Kenya who knew stuff.
But the thing was that when I started to do some research on Idi Amin and his time,
and that'd be a great title and it's all right yeah yeah uh and what he had done and everything and there there came a point i called my editor and said i can't dance on all those graves this is not a comedy so it it got larger and sort of out of hand and and uh i wound up
liking that book more than any other because it used more of me than any other.
There's comedy in there, but there's also what Richard Stark used to do.
And it was like all the pen names got together to collaborate on this book.
And so I couldn't call a coffee to go.
And so I was trying to think of...
larger, more serious titles.
You know, you come up with things like Time of the Hero.
And I figured, if I'm going to fall asleep partway through the title, it's probably a bad title.
Sure.
And so eventually I called it Kahava, which is Swahili for coffee.
And I call it, I say it's Swahili for, we couldn't think of a title.
And now Warner Books, bless their hearts.
This was their idea, not mine, oddly enough.
They...
agree that the book was published badly and they are going to republish it in hardcover all over again.
Jeez.
That's pretty damn decent.
I am delighted.
But I'm sure they see a market for it.
I hope so.
You don't see that much, what's the word I'm looking for?
You know what I'm saying?
They don't do these things unless there's a good commercial reason for it.
I hope they're right about it.
When it got out, it got wonderful reviews.
I just have to quote you, just my favorite line from any review ever.
John Leonard in the Daily New York Times said, I don't want to know anybody who doesn't like this book.
Really?
That's a great one.
John can be pretty opinionated.
That's a great quote.
Toledo is one of my papers, by the way.
I mean, I love it because when a publicist calls me and asks me if I'm interested in an author, I can actually say, well, will it play in Toledo?
Well, maybe this one will.
It will, because they're going to get it.
I've got about 15 papers that take me now.
I've been syndicating myself with some success.
Just got Salt Lake City.
They start next week.
I just got Knoxville, Tennessee, Columbus a couple times a month.
We'll be able to get you into some places where the publicists don't normally go.
Right.
Let me just think now.
Any comments on the state of American journalism on the strength of these two novels here?
Is this a commentary or are you just using a fat and dumb easy target?
Well, I don't know.
It seems to me that when the reporters sat down at table
with their subjects with the subjects were politicians or uh... showbiz people or or whatever that something was inevitably lost in the net and that we're seeing that these extremes of of uh... fawning and loathing and i think that they're too close that that uh...
The journalist is supposed to be standing in the snow looking in the window, God damn it, and then come back and tell you what he saw.
I'll tell you, I've been in this business for a lot of years, and nothing I detest more than some reporter to tell you how hard it was for him to get the story or how mad he is at somebody for not talking to him or her.
Who cares?
It's irrelevant.
I mean, they don't care anything about me at all.
I mean, it's the story I have to tell.
But I think also we're not supposed to look too deeply for meanings and messages in your books, too, right?
I mean, you've quoted Sam Goldman on this, I think.
Right.
Which is a great quote.
I mean, storytelling is all, I think.
Yes, storytelling is the point of it.
And there are a lot of people who think they're making a statement about the world we live in and all that.
And just if you set a novel in present-day America, you can't help it.
I mean, there's a statement there, you know, just the way you describe an automobile is going to show a lot about your own attitudes towards life.
And to say, well, that means I'm a philosopher of the American zeitgeist is a little pretentious.
So, no, what is there is there, and so...
Whatever byproducts there may be, the principal product of this factory is story.
And when was your first book published?
You go back to the 30s.
1960.
Wow.
1960, yep.
And you were a mere lad at that time?
I guess I'm asking you how old you are.
Yeah, I'm 61.
I'll tell you the way things always work.
Random House bought my first book, and the editor said, we're going to publish in July.
And at that time, back in 1960, remember, the New York Times used to have this thing published today, a little thing.
No, I don't remember that, but that's interesting.
Yeah, it was like, you know.
What they did is they printed pub dates.
Yeah, but yeah, so there was a little box in Every Day's Times that they published today, and there'd be this little list of books that the...
that the regular trade publishers had published that day.
It's like the ship sailing news that you said.
That's kind of cute, actually.
Yeah.
But totally worthless because nobody abides by these dates.
Right.
Absolutely.
Then that became published recently.
And then they dropped it.
Yeah.
Well, it's probably best.
But they were still doing publishing published today.
I mean, John Irving's book is published on the 5th.
next week.
It's on every bestseller list all over America.
Which is ridiculous.
Which is why I ran my interview with him this week.
I said, I may as well.
It's an exclusive for another two weeks.
He hasn't had him the first person to talk to.
I may as well get a little mileage out of it.
Anyway, so I said to the editor, she said it's going to be published in July.
And I said, well, my birthday is July 12th.
Could we
Could it be July 12th?
You know, then I'm going to get a thing in the Times that says published today and it's going to be on my birthday.
She said, fine.
So... That's great.
Everything was said.
It was my first book.
Everything is great.
We're going to have a combination birthday publication party.
And about a week beforehand, before July 12th, I said to my editor, I'm going to be doing this.
And she said, oh, I forgot.
I forgot to tell them.
So actually the publication date is July 27th.
Oh, shit.
My first book is being published next year on August 22nd, which is my wife's birthday.
Aha.
If they remember.
And they will because they were supposed to publish it in March or April and they said they wanted a couple more months.
So I said, fine, make it August 22nd.
I'm with Hope.
It's a nonfiction book.
It's a book about bibliomania, book madness.
Ah.
And I spent a few years researching it.
You remember the guy that stole the 26,000 books?
He had an apartment for them.
He had a house in Ottumwa, Iowa.
I went to his trial and he took me.
I had the only interview with him.
I went to the house.
Right.
An old Victorian house in Ottumwa.
That's where Edna Ferber was from.
I was going to think because it was a guy in New York.
who did the same thing, and he had a separate apartment for his books.
Oh, this guy, Stephen, stole from 350 libraries all over the country.
The books were said to be valued at $20 million, more like $6 or $7 million, but who's going to argue?
Right.
But what I loved about him is he stole them to keep them, not to sell them.
He loved them.
He was impassioned.
I think we've covered a good deal, don't you think?
Yes.
Is there anything that I should know that I don't?
I guess when did you know you were funny?
When did you know that you could make people laugh in your writing?
Because, I mean, I'll tell you, if you think you can make people laugh and you can't,
I mean, nothing puts me off more than reading a book where a guy cracks a joke and everybody laughs in the book.
Oh, God, yeah.
But, I mean, that destroys it, don't you think?
Yeah, I don't think I would ever type that sentence.
No, but you know that sentence.
I've seen it.
They're falling on the floor in laughter.
Yeah, I know.
The thing is that I was...
I love the modern world.
You're getting a fax, even as we speak.
Yeah, as we speak.
That's right.
Not for me.
I'm looking at my machine.
It's not doing anything.
No, it's mine.
I can see it coming out.
So, I was... About comedy, I wasn't funny at first.
The first... I mean, from 1960 to 65... Did you try?
No.
I was trying to be, you know, do it right.
I was trying to be...
a regular guy and do it the way you're supposed to.
Because all the time that I was growing up, and in fact into my 20s, I was never the funniest kid in class.
I was never the funniest person around.
I was always the funniest kid's best friend.
I was the appreciator.
I was the laugher.
You were the Ed McMahon.
Yeah, I was the Ed McMahon, exactly.
I was the one who had to stay after class because I was the one who was behaving like a buffoon.
So it never occurred to me that I should try to be funny because that was the funny guy.
You know, I was his friend.
So then in 65, I started another book and it started to come out funny.
And I didn't know why, but it just did...
I mean, it was that first-person narrator, and he just had this funny take on life.
And I called my agent and said, it's coming out funny.
And he said, don't do that.
I said, you'll never get a paperback sale.
I said, nobody can translate comedy, so you're not going to get any foreign sales.
Gee, I never thought of that.
That's right.
Yeah.
It's true.
Nobody can translate comedy.
I don't know what those books look like in foreign languages.
In Japanese, especially.
Oh, yes.
Yeah.
But anyway, so I said, well, it's going fast.
You know, I'll just get it out of my system this time, and then I'll go back and do it right next time.
And that was the end of me, you know.
Do they translate these things for you?
Yeah, yeah.
I've been translated into something like 15 languages.
And are they funny?
Yeah.
I guess so.
People tell me that because I don't read anything.
There's one country in the world.
Here's a trivia question.
It's my only trivia question.
There's one country in the world in which I'm published in three languages.
One country.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, it has to be a country that has a number of official languages, like Canada, right, which has French and English.
So it must be French and English up there.
So what's the third?
Alaskan or something?
No.
I don't know.
All right, so it's Spain.
It's Spanish, Catalan, and Basque.
And you're published in those three languages?
Wow.
How many different languages altogether?
I think it's about 15 now.
Good for you.
Those three in French and Italian and German and...
all of the Scandinavian languages and Russian and Japanese.
Jeez.
And Czech.
And they keep doing it, so they must be funny.
They must be.
I don't know what they think.
Well, listen, I think I've taken up a lot of your time, and I've got plenty of stuff here.
Okay.
And I'll be moving this along pretty quickly.
Susan's sending me some, I need a bunch of photographs to send in my various newspapers.
Okay.
And it'll be along shortly.
And I enjoyed talking to you.
Thank you.
So did I. And I hope we do it again sometime.
Take care.
All right.
Bye-bye.